RFC: `impl-trait-for-fn` (#3476)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/3476-expose-fn-type.md

This exposes the ghost-/inner-/localtype of a function to the user.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

I was trying to make something similar to bevy's system functions. And for safety reasons, they check for conflicts between SystemParams, so that a function requiring `Res<A>` and `ResMut<A>` [panic](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/blob/main/crates/bevy_ecs/src/system/system_param.rs#L421).

Then after I heard about axum's [`#[debug_handler]`](https://docs.rs/axum/latest/axum/attr.debug_handler.html) I wanted to do something similar to my copy of bevy systems, so that I get compile time errors when there is a conflict. I wanted even more, I wanted to force the user to mark the function with a specific proc attribute macro in order to make it possible to pass it into my code and call itself a system.

For that, I would need to mark the type behind the function, for example, with a trait.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

As we all know, you can refer to a struct by its name and for example implement a trait
```rust
struct Timmy;
impl Person for Timmy {
    fn greet() {
        println!("Hey it's me, Timmy!");
    }
}
```

> When we want to target a specific function for a trait implementation, we somehow need to get to the type behind it. That is being done with the `fn` keyword as follows

Reviewer: Consider adding a section somewhere to define or clarify terminology, such as "fn item", "fn pointer", "specific fn pointer" or whatever you use.

```rust
fn my_function() {}
impl MyTrait for fn my_function {
    /* ... */
}
```
---
For a better understanding, imagine you have a struct like this:
```rust
struct FnContainer<F: Fn()> {
    inner: F,
}
fn goods() { }

let contained_goods = FnContainer {
    inner: goods
};
```
Here, we make a `FnContainer` which can hold every function with the signature `() -> ()` via generics.
But what about explicitly designing the `FnContainer` for a specific function, just like the compiler does when resolving the generics. This will work the same as with the trait impl from above:
```rust
struct GoodsContainer {
    inner: fn goods,
}
fn goods() {}

let contained_goods = GoodsContainer {
    inner: goods,

> }

Author: yeah its a ZST which holds the function (also ZST) but is able to call it. I just scrambled up something to try to explain it. But i wouldn't know a better example. Maybe ill add an impl block to it

```
---
A function with a more complex signature, like with parameters, modifiers or a return type, is still just referenced by its name, because it's already unique
```rust
async fn request_name(id: PersonID) -> String { .. }

impl Requestable for fn request_name {
    /* ... */
}
```

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

As described in the **Guide-level explanation**, with the syntax `fn <fn_path>`, we can reference the type behind the named function.

When the function is for example in a different mod, it should be referenced by its path
```rust
mod sub {
    fn sub_mod_fn() { .. }
}
impl fn sub::sub_mod_fn {
    /* ... */

> }

Reviewer: Are specific function pointers currently treated as a local type (terminology from [E0210](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/master/compiler/rustc_error_codes/src/error_codes/E0210.md))? While this is definitely cool, the ability to add custom inherent impls on a specific function pointer brings a superset of possible issues that could be brought by normal trait impls. Should we analyze the two issues separately?

It is definitely [currently possible to implement a trait on function pointers in general](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=0dc8c5950decf2ea9b8f46ca672f440b), no matter specific or not, but I don't know if the inability to inherent-impl a specific fn pointer to a local function is merely due to its Voldemort properties or if it is intentionally so (or is it already possible through some trick I am not aware of?) or if it causes any incompatibility with the current dot-deref checks (since now `fn_name.foo()` could be `<fn fn_name>::foo(fn_name)`, `<&(fn fn_name>>::foo(fn_name)`, `<fn()>::foo(fn_name)`, `<&fn()>::foo(fn_name)`, etc).

Author: Yeah `<fn fn_name>::foo(fn_name)` should be possible... the other ones i kind of don't understand how they would be possible.

Author: Also ill add a note for similar behavior as E0210

Reviewer: @DasLixou the `&` case is because of dot operator auto deref, the last two are because of type coercion

Author: But what does <fn()> here even mean? For me it looks like a Fn pointer

```

> It should be also possible to get the type of functions inside impl blocks:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It should be also possible to get the type of associated functions:
```

```rust
struct MyStruct;
impl MyStruct {
    fn new() -> Self { Self }
}

> impl fn MyStruct::new {

Reviewer: Do we use turbofish syntax if `MyStruct` takes a generic parameter? e.g.

```rust
struct MyStruct<T>(T);
```

Do we write `fn MyStruct<T>::new` or `fn MyStruct::<T>::new`? If we choose the latter, would it cause any inconsistency from the `fn send<T>` syntax below (as opposed to `fn send::<T>`)?

Author: I'll look into that. I also see another problem here: Imagine this
```rust
struct MyStruct<T> {
    pub fn new(x: T) -> Self {
        // ...
    }
}
```
is it
`impl<T> fn MyStruct[::]<T>::new`
or is it
`impl<T> fn MyStruct::new[::]<T>`
?
what do you think? is there a prefered situation for this in rust or should we maybe allow both? @SOF3

Reviewer: definitely the former. `MyStruct::new<T>` doesn't make sense because the type parameter is on MyStruct not the associated function. This would go wrong if `new` itself also accepts type parameters.

As for whether to use turbofish, I guess this depends on how the compiler parses this expression. I'm not a parser expert, so this part needs some input from the compiler team.

Author: @SOF3 So I made some tests and would say that it's more "rusty" when we do `MyStruct::<T>::new` instead of `MyStruct<T>::new` (https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=316deb57a2d9552d8284a35fb56db2a0)

What do you think?

Reviewer: Yep, but since we are in type context not expression context here, turbofish is probably unnecessary. The turbofish syntax is required for expressions only because of ambiguity with the less-than operator (`<`), but we don't have such ambiguity if we specify that `fn` is always followed by a path instead of an expression.

Of course, you might also want an expression there if it is a generic `typeof` operator, but this is not the case for the scope of this RFC.

> impl fn MyStruct::new {

Reviewer: Any potential parsing ambiguity if we are taking a fn pointer on an associated function of a fn pointer? e.g.

```rust
fn foo() {}
impl fn foo {
    fn bar() {}
}

// how do we parse this?
type FooBar = fn fn foo::bar;
```

Definitely a very bad syntax that must be disallowed, but better specify it in the reference-level explanation.

Author: Yeah this should definitly be forbidden. If we do the `{}` syntax this would be `fn {fn {foo}::bar}`. Otherwise I'm currently not sure if we would want `fn (fn foo)::bar` or `fn <fn foo>::bar`. I'll leave this open until we found a solution (maybe also for the `{}` syntax)

    /* ... */
}

> ```

Reviewer: What about associated types in trait-impl blocks? Do we write

```
fn <MyStruct as Debug>::fmt
```

If `Debug` is already in scope, is `fn MyStruct::fmt` supposed to work regardless, using the same inference rules as the normal function reference?

Author: That is acutally a good point! I kind of start to like it when so many people think about niche things i never thought of 😅.
I'll look at how it is with associated types (e.g. if `<MyStruct as Iterator>::Item` is needed or if i can just use `MyStruct::Item` and refer to that).

When a function has generics, they will be handled as follows, just like we know it from normal types
```rust
fn send<T: Send>(val: T) {}
impl<T: Send> ParcelStation for fn send<T> {
    /* ... */
}
```

When we have an implicit generic, they will be appended in order to the generic list:
```rust
fn implicit_generic(val: impl Clone) -> impl ToString {}

> impl<T: Send, U: ToString> for fn implicit_generic<T, U> {

Reviewer: This is inconsistent with the function call syntax:

```rust
fn foo<T>(val: impl Clone) {}

// normal call
foo::<i32>("");

// now the specific fn pointer syntax suddenly becomes
type Alias = fn foo<i32, &'static str>;
```

I would prefer just leaving them Voldemort for now.

Author: @SOF3 [this](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3476#discussion_r1305504716) may be a solution, but what do you mean by "leaving them Voldemort"?

Reviewer: just don't accept this type. make it unable to name just like closure types.

    /* ... */
}
```

> Just as structs and enums have the possibility to derive traits to automatically generate code, function type do too

Reviewer: This may be a major problem for macro developers. For one thing, `syn::DeriveInput` currently has no `Verbatim` variant, so an extra derive input type will most likely be impossible to implement without introducing syn v3 (oh no, we just got (not yet) everyone upgraded to syn v2).

Plus, I don't see any practical reason to need to derive traits for specific fn pointers (which are always ZST) other than for `Debug`, which we can already implement in libcore instead. If traits defined by libraries have a specific requirement to implement on specific function pointers that cannot be done generically, they can use an attribute macro instead of a derive macro for this specific case.

Author: That's the feedback i was waiting for 😅. I wasn't sure how easily it will be so i threw it into the RFC and waited to see if anyone would complain. So back to attribute macros

```rust
#[derive(DbgSignature)]
fn signature_test(val: i32) -> bool {
    /* ... */
}

// Expands to

fn signature_test(val: i32) -> bool {
    /* ... */
}
impl DbgSignature for fn signature_test {
    fn dbg_signature() -> &'static str {
        "fn signature_test(val: i32) -> bool"
    }
}
```

Other than that, it should behave like every other type does.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

- When introducing the derive feature, it could lead to parsing problems with proc macros having an older `syn` crate version.

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

The type behind functions already exists, we just need to expose it to the user.
The hard part would be allowing derives, because that may break some things.

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

> i dont know any

Reviewer: Are there any existing workarounds for this, e.g. through macros in specific scenarios etc?

Author: I don't think so. I couldn't imagine how you could get behind a specific type of a function at all.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

> - Is the syntax good? It could create confusion between a function pointer.

Reviewer: Not familiar with compiler parsing internals, but could also consider `fn {path}`, which is slightly similar to the current compiler diagnostics.

Author: isn't that what i already do? or do you mean with explicit `{}` wrapped around?

Reviewer: yes

- What about closures? They don't even have names so targetting them would be quite difficult. I wouldn't want to use the compiler generated mess of a name like `[closure@src/main.rs:13:18: 13:20]`. It would also contain line numbers which would be changing quite often so thats not ideal.
- I provided a possible solution for a `fn implicit_generic(val: impl Clone) -> impl ToString` function, but because we currently don't have a defined syntax for those generics in types, thus we can't use `impl Trait` as types for fields in structs, we should think about this more, maybe don't implement exposed types of function for such `fn`s and wait for another RFC?

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

> - Also expose the type of closures

Reviewer: Consider including consistency of display names as well. Currently:

- `std::any::type_name_of_val(&drop::<()>)` evaluates to `"core::mem::drop<()>"`
- When a specific function pointer appears in a compiler error, it looks like this:

```
5 |     let () = drop::<()>;
  |         ^^   ---------- this expression has type `fn(()) {std::mem::drop::<()>}`
  |         |
  |         expected fn item, found `()`
```

Choices of display include "fn item" (as opposed to "fn pointer" if it is cast to `fn(())` first), the function path and a mix of function pointer + `{path}`. It might be more consistent if the syntax eventually adopted in this RFC is consistent with the syntax in compiler diagnostics.

Author: this is a fair point, but i feel like that this will just make more boilerplate. we already specified the function and i dont want to make my impl even longer... on the other side: WAIT A MINUTE! this could solve our "what to do with `impl Trait` type param" problem...
So that we write
```rust
fn my_fn(x: impl ToString) -> String { x.to_string() }
impl<X: ToString> fn(X) my_fn {
   // ...
}
```
Ok that would be really cool.
So would you agree that boilerplate is okay here? @SOF3 

"Problem" is that this RFC tends to turn into a more generic `type_of` thing where this syntax wouldn't be possible anymore.. but type_of is another story so what you requested might be the solution i needed

Author: So i am currently rewriting and for now I will do this partially but use `fn_name` rather than `{fn_name}` because i think this could collide when we want to do something like this
```rust
impl MyTrait for fn() -> bool {

}
```
I don't know if something like this is planned or if this is already marked as "no" (if so please say it to me so ill change it in the RFC), but if it isn't, then the compiler may not be able to differentiate between `fn() {name} {block}` and `fn() {block}`

Reviewer: > this is a fair point, but i feel like that this will just make more boilerplate. we already specified the function and i dont want to make my impl even longer... on the other side: WAIT A MINUTE! this could solve our "what to do with `impl Trait` type param" problem... So that we write
> 
> ```rust
> fn my_fn(x: impl ToString) -> String { x.to_string() }
> impl<X: ToString> fn(X) my_fn {
>    // ...
> }
> ```
> 
> Ok that would be really cool. So would you agree that boilerplate is okay here? @SOF3
> 
> "Problem" is that this RFC tends to turn into a more generic `type_of` thing where this syntax wouldn't be possible anymore.. but type_of is another story so what you requested might be the solution i needed

not a fan of this. two type expressions joined together without a delimiter is most likely not acceptable to the compiler team, considering we can't do the same with decl macro inputs either.

Reviewer: > 

what about just `fn {fn_name}`?

Author: What do you mean by joined together?

Reviewer: if it has a return type, the return expression will immediately be followed by the function path, which might lead to parsing ambiguities

Author: I don't think that's a problem.

Author: So what about moving the name front? `fn my_func` and `fn my_func(prms) -> ret`. But that would not match with the error syntax u sent

Reviewer: actually my point was that we should make them consistent, but we could change the diagnostic display instead of the syntax

Author: So is the syntax that I currently have in the RFC ok?

Author: I added a `ToDo's` section at the end where i proposed a syntax change but I'm not sure if it is that well with the generic in the for "structure"? 😅

- Feature Name: `expose-fn-type`
- Start Date: 2023-08-20
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#3476](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3476)
- Rust Issue: N/A

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

This exposes the function type of a function item to the user.

# Motivation

> [motivation]: #motivation

Reviewer 2: I'll add more motivation: In Swift, some functions have an associated selector that you can access with [`#selector`](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swift/using-objective-c-runtime-features-in-swift).

In my crate `objc2`, it would be immensely beautiful (and useful) to be able to do something similar, e.g. access a function's selector using something like `MyClass::my_function::Selector` or `selector(MyClass::my_function)`, instead of having to know the selector name (which might be something completely different than the function name).

Author: May I just 1 to 1 copy that sentence? 😅

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

As we all know, you can refer to a struct by its name and for example implement a trait
```rust
struct Timmy;
impl Person for Timmy {
    fn greet() {
        println!("Hey it's me, Timmy!");
    }
}
```
When we want to target a specific function for a trait implementation, we somehow need to get to the type behind it. 
Refering to the hidden type is achieved via the following syntax
```rust
fn is_positive(a: i32) -> bool { /* ... */ }
impl MyTrait for fn(i32) -> bool is_positive {
    /* ... */
}
```
For function signatures, where every parameter/return-type is a fixed type and can be known just by refering to the function (so no generics or `impl Trait` parameters/return type), we can drop the redundant information:
```rust
fn is_positive(a: i32) -> bool { /* ... */ }
impl MyTrait for fn is_positive {
    /* ... */
}
```

> 💡 NOTE: Even when we need to describe the function type but the return type is `()`, we can (just as for function pointers and function traits) drop the `-> ()` from the type. (This should also be added as a lint).

---

> A function with a more complex signature, like a const function, we just ignore that when naming the type:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A function with a more complex signature, like a function that specifies `const`, `unsafe` or `extern "ABI"`, we just ignore that when naming the type:
```

```rust
fn send<T: Send>(val: T, postal_code: u32) {}
impl<T: Send> ParcelStation for fn(T, u32) send {
    /* ... */
}
```

When we have an implicit generic, the same rule applies
```rust
fn implicit_generic(val: impl Clone) -> impl ToString {}
impl<T: Clone, U: ToString> for fn(T) -> U implicit_generic {
    /* ... */
}
```

---

Just as structs and enums have the possibility to derive traits to automatically generate code, function type have similar ways via attribute macros:

```rust
#[debug_signature]
fn signature_test(val: i32) -> bool {
    /* ... */
}

// Expands to

fn signature_test(val: i32) -> bool {
    /* ... */
}
impl DbgSignature for fn signature_test {
    fn dbg_signature() -> &'static str {
        "fn signature_test(val: i32) -> bool"
    }
}
```

Other than that, it should behave like every other type does.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

The type behind functions already exists, we just need to expose it to the user.

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

i dont know any

> # Unresolved questions

Reviewer 2: I think this may need some work regarding lifetimes?

https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/56105 is still unresolved, and I think it applies here as well?

Author: Ah yeah I'll add a lifetime example as well. Also I'll look if I need to link that tracking issue

In my crate `objc2`, it would be immensely beautiful (and useful) to be able to do something similar, e.g. access a function's selector using something like `MyClass::my_function::Selector` or `selector(MyClass::my_function)`, instead of having to know the selector name (which might be something completely different than the function name).

# Terminology

I'll may shorten `function` to `fn` sometimes.

- **function pointer**: pointer type with the type syntax `fn(?) -> ?` directly pointing at a function, not the type implementing the `Fn[Once/Mut](?) -> ?` traits.
- **function item** (or just function): a declared function in code. free-standing or associated to a type.
- **function group**: many non-specific functions with the same signature (params, return type, etc.)
- **function trait(s)**: the `Fn[Once/Mut](?) -> ?` traits
- **function type**: the type behind a function, which also implements the function traits.
- **fixed type**: directly named type, no generic / `impl Trait`.
- **describe the function type**: write `fn(..) -> ? name` instead of just `fn name`.

> # Guide-level explanation

Reviewer 2: Although I agree that this is where we want to end up, I think that this RFC is focusing too much on the `impl Trait for [FunctionType]` use-case.

Maybe it would make sense to restrict the RFC to just figuring out the syntax for `fn` items? Or make a new RFC for just the syntax? I would be willing to drive that effort, if you think so?

Implementing traits for functions have many other nuances, I'll just name a few that I don't think have been explored enough in this RFC:
- Coherence: what traits should you be allowed to implement for your function? Can I implement `IntoIterator` for my function? What if 10 years down the road the language wants to start implementing `IntoIterator` for function items of the form `fn() -> impl Iterator`?
- How might it affect inference rules if you implement a trait for your function, where the trait is also implemented for `fn` pointers.

Reviewer 2: I tried to find some other examples of when you'd want to talk about the function item type instead of just using the function pointer, and I honestly couldn't really find a compelling example, which is supposedly why it doesn't exist yet.

Author: @madsmtm good point with the fn thing! I honestly wonder how that would integrate with generator functions...

Reviewer 2: Note to self: The standard library uses the macro `impl_fn_for_zst!` to support exactly the use-case of naming a function item, because they store it in generic helper structs, and would like that storage to be zero-cost.

impl MyTrait for fn is_positive {
    /* ... */
}
```

> 💡 NOTE: Even when we need to describe the function type but the return type is `()`, we can (just as for function pointers and function traits) drop the `-> ()` from the type. (This should also be added as a lint).

---
A function with a more complex signature, like a function that specifies `const`, `unsafe` or `extern "ABI"`, we just ignore that when naming the type:
```rust
const fn my_fn(a: i32) -> (i16, i16) { .. }
impl MyTrait for fn my_fn {}
// or with explicit declaration
impl MyTrait for fn(i32) -> (i16, i16) my_fn { .. }
```

When having an async function, we in theory have a `impl Future<Output = ..>` as a return type, which should force us to explicitly declare the function type like so
```rust
async fn request_name(id: PersonID) -> String { .. }

impl<F: Future<Output = String>> Requestable for fn(PersonID) -> F request_name {
    /* ... */
}
```
We can take a shortcut and use the `async` keyword, as long as the `Output` assoc type in the Future is still fixed
```rust
async fn request_name(id: PersonID) -> String { .. }

impl Requestable for async fn request_name {
    /* ... */
}
```

> # Reference-level explanation

Author: wow... that is a lot of thinking going in there... I suppose that you are going to take over the whole scenario with the more general syntax approach?

> [reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

Reviewer 2: I think it might make sense to explain this relating to [the current reference docs on function items](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/types/function-item.html), and how we'd update that given that we now _have_ syntax for talking about the function type.

}

// Expands to

fn signature_test(val: i32) -> bool {
    /* ... */
}
impl DbgSignature for fn signature_test {
    fn dbg_signature() -> &'static str {
        "fn signature_test(val: i32) -> bool"
    }
}
```

Other than that, it should behave like every other type does.

# Additional ToDo's

## Change the fn type syntax for consistency

When we try to compile the current [code snippet](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=cba2a1391c3e431a7499c6bf427b350d) 
```rust
fn cool<'a, T: Clone>(val: &'a T) -> (i32, bool) {
    todo!()
}

fn main() {
    let _a: () = cool;
}
```
we get following error:
```
error[E0308]: mismatched types
 --> src/main.rs:6:18
  |
6 |     let _a: () = cool;
  |             --   ^^^^ expected `()`, found fn item
  |             |
  |             expected due to this
  |
  = note: expected unit type `()`
               found fn item `for<'a> fn(&'a _) -> (i32, bool) {cool::<_>}`

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0308`.
```
For consistency, we should change the syntax to `for<'a, T: Clone> fn(&'a T) -> (i32, bool) cool` (I'm not sure if we should put generics in the for)

# Drawbacks

> [drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Reviewer 3: It think it's worth mentioning that these named fn types could be used to name private return types and private arguments on public functions.

```rust
/// Workaround for `fn_traits` and/or `unboxed_closures` copied from
/// https://docs.rs/c/latest/src/never_say_never/lib.rs.html#1-77
mod fn_traits {
    pub trait FnOnce<Args> {
        type Output;
    }

    impl<F, R> FnOnce<()> for F
    where
        F: ::core::ops::FnOnce() -> R,
    {
        type Output = R;
    }
}

mod public {
    mod private {
        pub struct Private;
    }
    fn returns_private() -> private::Private {
        private::Private
    }
}

// We get to name `Private` by going through `returns_private`.
// This is only possible if we can name the functions type.
pub type Private = <fn public::returns_private as fn_traits::FnOnce<()>>::Output;
```

Accessing `Private` from the outer scope is not something that's possible today. This isn't something I'd mind having as private return types on public functions can be quite annoying :sweat_smile:. Fortunately type aliases can't be used as unit struct constructors. That would have made this type leak a much bigger issue.
